[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> "Thinking Allowed."
Conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist
Jeffrey Mishlove.
>> Hello and welcome,
I'm Jeffrey Mishlove.
Today we're going to explore
aging, change, and dying.
My guest is Ram Dass,
author of many books,
including "Be Here Now," "Still
Here," "Grist for the Mill,"
"How can I Help?"
Ram Dass has been
a cultural pioneer
as part of the
spiritual renaissance,
part of the human
potential movement,
part of the
psychedelic movement,
and a great
inspiration to millions
of people such as myself, part
of the Baby Boom generation.
In recent years, he
has suffered a stroke,
so this will be a bit
of an unusual program,
and if there are pauses
during the conversation,
I invite you to use
them as opportunities
to enter deeply into
our conversation
in a meditative way.
Welcome, Ram Dass.
>> Thank you, Jeffrey.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
You write now more
eloquently about the soul.
That part of us that is
larger than our bodies.
And you make a point of
saying, interestingly,
not that we are not
our bodies, because we
are very much our bodies,
but we are more than that.
And that's, I guess, an
important awareness as we
get older and face the
types of things that occur.
>> Mm-hmm.
By my identifying
with my soul, I
didn't take the
brunt of this illness
because the soul doesn't have
illnesses, a soul doesn't die,
and it's a nice
place to identify.
Yeah.
>> One of the things about
which you write is that before
your stroke, you didn't have the
same understanding that you do
now about what it
means to face the--
to face death and to face
the real fear of losing
one's physical capacities.
>> This book that
I've written now,
this one called "Still Here,"
I had done about three-quarters
of it before I stroked,
and it was somehow of a--
distant from the--
distant from aging itself.
>> Yeah.
>> And I kept having thoughts,
if I could only get into the--
being an aging person, but I was
only 65, and I kept wishing--
wishing to be an old
man for this book,
because it was a book on age.
And I was in bed,
and I got a feeling--
I was really envisioning
I was an old man.
And the phone rang, and I
stood up to go to the phone,
and my leg went out.
And I got to the phone and the
person on the other end, they--
my voice was funny, and he
said, are you all right?
I said, yeah.
And he didn't trust it, so he
was calling from another place,
and he called my secretaries,
told them to come over
because I was sick.
And they came over and then
they found me on the floor.
In my mind, all that happened
was I was becoming aged.
I didn't think of sickness.
And they saw an aged person on--
but they didn't understand
it was just aged.
So they 911'd it, and
next, central casting
sent over 10 firemen
looking at this old man.
I was watching from
the side of the room.
And then they transferred me
to an ambulance and hospital
and it seemed strange.
I was just being an old man.
And that was-- it was--
that was initially the
way I had the stroke.
And--
>> You had no idea.
>> No.
And-- no.
I didn't-- it was--
in fact, the doctors said that
I was probably going to die,
and that I had a massive
stroke and stuff like that.
And they told it to
all my friends and--
the-- each other.
And as I looked--
all of the faces looked serious.
My friends looked serious.
And they didn't tell me.
And I was looking at the
pipes on the ceiling.
And here, I've sat next to
beds with dying people--
>> Many times.
And I always feel
spiritual, therefore,
and I assume that the dying
person feels spiritual, too.
And there I was dying,
and not spiritual at all--
>> Just looking at the pipes.
>> Yeah, a fine thing.
I mean-- I should have--
me, an old spiritual
person, but I--
>> There was a detachment.
>> Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
And they just never told
me I was going to die.
>> But of course,
you didn't die.
>> I know it, that's--
[LAUGHTER]
>> Thankfully.
>> Here I am.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh huh.
And we're glad to have you
here, but that experience
transformed your life
in many profound ways.
You're here in a
wheelchair, and I see
this arm looks pretty useless.
>> Oh yes it is.
Yes.
>> You've developed a new
relationship with yourself
and with your body.
>> Well, a friend of mine
said after the stroke,
you're more human now, which
is a fighting word to somebody
that's being a holy man.
[LAUGHTER]
And-- but I did get
more into my body,
more into the physical
world, but I didn't--
but it turned out
to be spiritual.
>> Yeah.
>> For example, I became
fascinated between--
by-- I have a spiritual
path, which is guru kripa.
It's the grace of the guru.
>> Maharaji--
>> Yes.
My guru had grace, and
then there was the stroke.
Grace, stroke, grace, stroke--
>> Opposites.
>> Yeah.
>> Uh huh.
>> And-- but I--
that's pushing them together.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And I couldn't have imagined
that he would have let his
grace go for me so badly.
And I kept feeling that
the stroke must have grace.
>> Yes.
Ram Dass, we'll take a break.
>> OK.
>> We'll be back.
Welcome back to
"Thinking Allowed."
I'm your host, Jeffrey Mishlove.
My guest is Ram Dass.
We're talking about
aging, change, and dying.
And just before
our break, you were
describing this very
poignant, powerful moment
of trying to reconcile the fact
that one of your worst fears,
I suppose, had come true.
You'd had a stroke, and
how do we reconcile that
with your deep sense of living
with the grace of your guru?
>> Yeah.
The grace of the guru, stroke.
Grace, stroke.
This was my sadhana, my
spiritual path for two weeks,
three weeks.
How am I to--
and that changed my
understanding of grace,
because I learned about
grace that is terrible.
>> Mm-hmm.
Fierce grace.
>> Fierce grace, fierce grace.
And it turned out that it
was real grace, but my guru--
he once was talking to
a girl, an Indian girl,
and she was very
sad, and she was--
she said, Maharaji,
she said, my life
is suffering, so much suffering.
And she was so
poignant and you know.
And he said, you know,
he said, suffering--
suffering-- suffering
brings me closer to God.
Suffering brings
me close to God.
And that stroke brings
There are a lot of ways it's
grace, but it introduces me,
which--
because of the
sickness, introduces me
to silence, which is graceful.
You hear God when you're silent.
The stroke-- well,
I once did a book
with Paul Gorman,
"How Can I Help?"
Now I'd say the book would
ask, how can you help me?
Because I'm dependent,
which it's--
in this culture,
dependency is frowned upon.
>> Yes..
>> And it's not power.
And I have been
powerful my whole life.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> You know, like--
>> Even as a holy man, you
were a powerful holy man.
>> Yes.
And so it was grace to find
out these roles, these roles,
because I could--
when I was a helper, I
was a powerful helper.
I mean, that's what most
people are that are helping.
And I think I'm helping those--
but when I'm helpless, we
enter into a sole friendship.
And I'm less inclined to try
on the role of a sick person
as I was the role of helper.
And keeping out of the
roles, then it gets to souls.
>> Soul to soul.
>> And to me, what goes on
between two people is heart
resuscitation.
Souls, they're like
those planes that--
up in the air where
they're fueling.
And we give each other fuel.
>> Yeah.
>> And I was I do that with
all these helpers and--
>> So many people probably are
living in fear that something
like this might happen
or something else.
And the fear often keeps
us from soul awareness
when the actual event
isn't necessarily--
>> That's what I--
>> It's damaging.
>> That's what I found.
That the fear of stroke
is much more damaging
than the stroke itself.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And-- yeah.
>> People sometimes,
I would imagine,
feel nervous around somebody
who is disabled or handicapped
in one way or another.
The nervousness
might interfere with
that soul-to-soul connection.
>> Yeah.
The wheelchair, it's a
thing, so that-- it's
the thing that everybody
has to deal with.
>> Yeah.
>> And you begin
to see how they--
it stands in the way of
a social interaction.
>> Mm-hmm.
I wheeled you in here
a little earlier.
I noticed that you--
with your good arm,
you always wanted to push
it faster than I could.
>> Yes, yes.
Yes.
One of the things that
this role has faced me with
is having control
of my own life.
Just like you said, you were
too pushing fast and I met my--
everybody controls me.
And everybody does
what's best for me.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And I sit around feeling that
I'm losing control of my life.
And when I-- before
I had the stroke,
I had control all the
time, which was nice.
>> Mm-hmm.
You were a master, I think.
All functioning adults
pretty much are, and we all--
>> That's right.
>> --face these stages.
And this part--
I'm learning to give up
control, which is more ego.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> And just resting in the soul.
>> And I guess it means also
letting go of who you used
to be.
>> Yeah.
Well, who I used to be, I
played the cello, I played golf,
I drove sports cars.
>> And traveled
all over the world.
>> Yeah, but the reason I
used these because this is--
>> Ram Dass, we're
just about out of time.
Fortunately, we're going to do
a second part to this program,
so we encourage our viewers
to check their schedule
to hear part 2.
It's been such a joy being
with you for this program,
a real heartfelt experience.
Thank you so much.
Thank you also
for being with us,
and check your program
guide for part 2.
[MUSIC PLAYING]